THE SINEWS OF WAR

HOW SUPPLY AFFECTS EVERYTHING IN BvG

* INTRODUCTION/OBJECTIVES *

/What do you have to do?/

/Mention Late-War/

*THE SUPPLY SYSTEM*

"Money makes the world go 'round," the old saying goes.  And it's true in BvG, too, the
unit of money in this case being the supply point.  To get anything done, you have to use
supply.  With each point, you can:

1) draw an unknown card from the draw pile
2) draw a known card from cadre
3) restore up to three depleted units
4) attack with one force
5) reorganize all your cards

It's not too much to say that the player making the best use of his supply points will
be the one that wins the game.

General Principle: Evaluate all game actions in terms of their supply equivalents.

Normally, the USA gets 5 supply per turn while the CSA gets 4.  So the CSA is behind the
curve from the start, and each turn the differential in cumulative supply points grows.
Worse for the south, the CSA allotment can be reduced by northern success, and
the USA gets an extra supply point during Late War.  So the slight USA advantage in the
beginning becomes more pronounced as the game wears on.  In a game that goes the
distance, the CSA forces' ability to recover their losses and counterattack disintegrates
in a most satisfyingly historical fashion.

Another old saying is that "Time is money."  Since BvG's money is supply, then the saying
must mean "time is supply" -- and it is!  Each turn, the USA must spend at least two of 
his supply points drawing cards.  The turn after he draws his last card, the game ends.

There are 67 cards in the USA draw pile, so the game will last between 15 (USA drawing
5 cards/turn) and 35 (USA drawing 2 cards/turn) turns.

It turns out that neither is an optimal strategy.  The supply allotments favor the 
USA dragging out the game to take advantage of superior numbers.   Consider: in the
15-turn scenario, the USA will have spent 75 supply points to the CSA 60, a 15-point
advantage.  But in the 35-turn scenario, its USA 175 v. CSA 140, a decisive 35-point
advantage.

But the USA can't drag his feet forever.  Sooner or later the 1864 Elections
will come out, and the USA must have made progress by then or will lose immediately.  
Also, the beginning of the game sees the CSA military roughly on par with the USA.  If 
sufficient numbers are not gathered, the CSA may go on the offensive.  The USA has
to be prepared early to fight off CSA strikes north.

But if the USA marshals his overwhelming force too quickly, he's quickly burns through his
deck, leaving less time in which to win.

So the supply rules, interacting with the USA deck size, set up a nice self-balancing
dynamic.  

The CSA has gotten short shrift in this discussion.  That's because nothing special happens
when the CSA enters late war or runs out of cards in his draw pile.  The clock's ticking
on the USA; all the CSA has to do is run it out.

*ARMIES & LEADERS*

*NAVIES*

There are only two types of naval cards: ironclad vessels (one for
each side), and squadrons, which only the USA has.  The navies are
much simpler than the armies, and few decisions need to be made in
using them.  The ironclads are technically Enigma cards rather than
navy cards, but their effects are largely naval, so we'll consider
them here.

Like the armies, naval squadrons can be stationed in either the East
or the West.

Squadrons in the East are on blockade duty.  The strength of the blockade
is None, Partial, or Full, depending on the number of squadrons
committed (0, 1, and 2 or more, respectively).  A Full Blockade
counts as a USA objective, and prevents the CSA from getting
a bonus undepletion (during Partial Blockade) or supply (if No
Blockade).  Eastern squadrons can also provide leadership for
amphibious invasions -- no leader needed -- and add their strength
to all combat at ports (attack and defense).

In the West, squadrons interdict the waterways, preventing the CSA
from using rivers for retreat routs, supply lines, or railnet size.
At least one squadron is needed in the West for the USA Mississippi
objective.  Western squadrons can also add their strength to all
combat at riverine cities.

The USA has three squadrons, one of which is available at the start of
the game.  Station it in the East to establish a Partial Blockade,
and leave it there, as you can't afford to have the CSA getting an
extra supply each turn due to No Blockade.

When you draw your second squadron, you certainly want to play it
immediately.  The question is, where should it go, East or West?

Two squadrons in the East works best under these conditions:

* the CSA is on the offensive and is threatening to win a diplomatic
victory.  Obtaining the Full Blockade objective may allow you to hang
on until the CSA can be pushed back out of your territory.

* the CSA has many depleted units, and you'd like to deny them the
free restore that they'll get with a partial blockade.

* you plan to make amphibious invasions, and the extra three strength
points provided by the squadron will give you the edge to win
a Soldier's Battle against your likely opposition.

On the other hand, one squadron each in the East and West works
best if:

* you are on the offensive in the West, driving down
the Mississippi and/or along the rivers towards Atlanta.

* you will be attacking cities where a riverine squadron cuts off CSA
retreat paths, such as Island No 10, Port Hudson, or Vicksburg (if
attacked from Jackson).

* most or all of the river cities are occupied and you can achieve
your Mississippi objective.  This is especially true if playing with
optional rule 5, and the CSA has not sent his required force to the
Trans-Mississippi, since then closing the Mississippi is worth two
objectives rather than one.

Closing the Mississippi also takes away the "Contraband" CSA production.
This will the cost the CSA either one supply or one free restore each
turn, depending on how many other production types have been captured.

Too much depends on the specifics of your game situation to come up with
a hard and fast rule for which theater to choose.  As a very rough rule of
thumb, I prefer the Full Blockade early in the game, and deployment in
the west when I can close the Mississippi.  But you should compute the probable
supply value of placement in each theater and act accordingly.

-----

Things are equally straightforward when all three squadrons are in
play: put two in the East and one in the West.  This establishes the
full blockade, and interdicts the Mississippi, which fulfills two
objectives.

Remember also can move between theaters.

Each side's single ironclad card should be played as soon as possible.
As the cards negate each other when played, their effects are
temporary at best.  But during the period when one side's ironclad is
available and the other remains in its draw pile, some useful
advantage can be gained.

The CSA Ironclads card gives one free restore per turn.  Thinking in
terms of supply points, if the CSA gets three undepletes, the card has
paid for itself.

The Monitor card gives the USA occupation of Norfolk and acts as a
blockading force.  Since a full blockade is a victory objective, and
denies the CSA the free restore he gets during a partial blockade,
it's quite a nice card to have.

*THE MAP*

BvG's map is highly unusual in that the playing area is made up of cards, and most of
them begin the game still in the players' decks.  Just four cards -- A, B, D, and E --
are laid out at start, limiting action to the Virginia / Maryland / Pennsylvania area.
New map cards can be added as they are drawn, opening new theaters of war.
Each player has a copy of the remaining map cards (C and F - K) in their draw pile; as a
fun twist, the USA and CSA versions of each map card differ, usually in very important ways.
And as a twist on the twist, there are actually *two* USA Map C cards, one with a Kentucky
neutral, and the other with Kentucky as pro-USA.

The map cards are exclusive, so the first side to play a map card has permanently decided what that
part of map looks like.  The other player's equivalent map card is then useless.

So, unlike most wargames, the playing area varies from game to game in two important ways.
The first is timing, since through the vagaries of chance a given map area might remain out of
play for a good deal of the game.  Capturing the Mississippi river or closing the Gulf ports
is hard when map card I is near the bottom of both players' decks!  Second, the an area's toughness
depends on who plays a particular card first.

The CSA must play all drawn map cards immediately, so there are no decisions to make. 

The USA, on the other hand, doesn't have to play map cards.  Why might you hold off?
There are five possibilities:

1) It's a Map C card during the first few turns, and you have no troops in the west.

2) It's the neutral Map C card, and you're hoping that you'll draw pro-USA Map C.

3) You can deny the CSA a retreat route by leaving the map out of play.

4) You can cut the CSA railnet if the card remains out of play.

5) You can isolate an important city (Richmond, Atlanta) by witholding the card.

But against these reasons you must weigh the possible cost of the CSA player getting his version
down first.  Each time this happens, additional cities, fortresses, and/or
pestholes appear, each costing additional time and supplies. You wouldn't have had to deal
with them if you just laid your card down first.

It's almost never worth trying to be cute.  So:

General Principle: As the USA, play your map cards ASAP.

The cheapest way to capture cities is the indirect approach: isolation.  But that's
harder to do then in many other point-to-point games, because it's not enough to capture all
adjacent cities --  instead, you have to control all cities within two locations.  Since even
"adjacent" cities can be fairly distant (see the Cincinnati - Harper's Ferry or Knoxville - Lynchburg
connections) it can be virtually impossible to force the surrender of certain cities. 

/Pairs of cities support each other/

The magic number 2 pops up in relation to leaders also.  Leaders with an Initiative
of 2 can bypass a non-pesthole location to attack the next city down the road.

/Railnet/

MAP A

The old northwest is usually, as it was historically, a backwater.  But if the CSA gets Map C, look out!
The relatively few cities present mean a lot of territory can be gobbled up quickly, and bypass attacks
become particularly fearsome.

Cincinnati is the key.  Once captured, the CSA can hit Indianapolis to cut the USA railnet.  (If Wheeling
is neutral, Toledo works just as well.)  If the USA hasn't gotten any objectives, the CSA wins.

Cleveland and Columbus rarely matter much -- usually the CSA has won by the time extra forces are
available to attack them.  But they still count as CSA objectives, and if the CSA can muster more
forces than the USA, they may be worth taking.

MAP B

The heart of the Union.

Washington is very difficult to capture, being a fortress and having a 10 strength garrison in addition
to whatever else the USA can scrape up.  But its capture is an immediate CSA win.  Once it looks like
the USA steamroller has begun, it may be worthwhile to take a 1/6 chance of winning before you get pushed back
to Richmond.

Harper's Ferry and Harrisburg are the keys to an early CSA blitz, since capturing both cuts the USA railnet
and the resulting +3 VPs often wins the game outright.  Harper's Ferry should see a lot of combat in the
early game until either the CSA wins outright or gets pushed back to Richmond.

If the CSA is going north, it's usually easier to bypass Baltimore.  It's a bit easier to take than
Washington, since it has no permanent garrison, and it's satisfying having the USA suffer the drm
trying to recapture it.  Sometimes a CSA attack here is needed to win if the USA establishes an early
blockade and the west isn't in play.

Pittsburgh is out of CSA reach.  If they can get there, they'll have won before they do so.

Neutral Wheeling interferes with the USA rail net.  Since either side can get this for free by
playing Enigma cards, it's rarely worth using a supply to attack it.  USA-controlled Wheeling can
trace supply to east as well as west -- keep this in mind if defending there.  Remember also that
Wheeling is connected to Cincinnati by river as well as "no attack" road.  This can
be an unpleasant surprise for the CSA if there's a Union naval squadron in west, or for the USA
if there isn't.

MAP C

The most important map card.  There's a decided advantage to the player that gets their card down
first.

USA Map C will allow an early USA drive down unfortified rivers towards New Orleans and Atlanta.

CSA Map C adds another pitstop on the Mississippi (Island No 10) and puts the "Fort" in Fts Henry
and Donelson, in addition to a pro-CSA Kentucky.  This allows a CSA blitz in the west, so watch the
USA fighting to prevent an early loss.

Neutral Map C (the historical result) will likely see KY bypassed until Emancipation throws it into the
USA camp.  Note that the river connections between Cairo and Fts Henry & Donelson can be used without
violating KY neutrality.

Early in the game, a neutral or pro-USA map C is likely, since the Union starts with more cards, draws
more cards (5 to the CSA 4) and has two map Cs in his deck.  After a few turns, when the USA shifts
to attacking, the CSA map C becomes more likely as the CSA is probably drawing more cards each turn.

Island No 10 prevents isolation of Vicksburg and vice versa.  It's easy enough for the USA to capture,
but you waste a supply doing so.

Cairo anchors the USA line in the west.  It's often not worth a CSA attack (suffering the fort drm)
as the pickings are better elsewhere.

Centralia is either ignored, or becomes the endgame of a western CSA blitz going through map A.
Capturing it with Indianapolis and Cincinnati in hand isolates Cairo and gets 5 VPs, a sure game
winner despite any USA successes in the east.

Beware, though: a 2-initiative CSA leader can still strike Centralia through even Neutral KY.

For either side, Louisville, Lexington, and Bowling Green are roadstops on the way to places you
really want to be.

Forts Henry & Donelson and Nashville are important steps on the way to Atlanta.  Given non-CSA KY, if
the USA can capture either before maps F or G are in play, the other falls by isolation.  This two-for-one
is nice when you can manage it.  Historically, Grant did just that.

MAP D

Shenandoah is the most important city, being an objective, part of CSA production, and the key to
keeping the CSA out of the North. Because it's also a pesthole, it can't be isolated or bypassed
by the USA -- he just has to bull through it. And due to La Belle Rebelle, he should do so sooner
rather than later.

Lynchburg helps sever the CSA railnet, cutting one of the three lines that join east and west.  It is
also (somewhat surprisingly) on the fastest route south (Lynchburg, Greensboro, Columbia) to Atlanta,
and helps to isolate Richmond.

Greensboro is mostly a path to better places.  Note that attackers from here can reach all the way to
Charleston / Ft Sumter, but not, curiously, Wilmington or New Berne.  Taking it also helps isolate 
Richmond.

Capturing Knoxville is the other way to cut the CSA rail net.  This path is useful if you've got
Blue Mountain Boys, but otherwise, because of naval support, the USA's best approach to Atlanta is
by river.

If playing with optional rule 2, Cumberland Gap is the least important space on the board. Since it
surrenders if both Lexington and Knoxville are enemy-occupied, attack those places instead and get
two for the price of one.

MAP E

Eastern Virginia sees a lot of action as the USA drives toward the important objective of Richmond.  The
Rebel capital is hard to isolate -- 10 cities are w/in two spaces -- and together with Petersburg
forms self-supporting supply island.

Petersburg has same defensive advantages as Richmond, but is worth less.  If you have to attack a
fortress anyway, you might as well attack Richmond directly.  The sole exception is if you have
Infernal Machines, which are useless against Richmond but work just fine against Petersburg (which 
is where they were historically used).

It takes a gutsy Confederate player to attack Fort Monroe. If as the CSA you have the strength to take a 
fortress, you're usually better off with Baltimore or Washington.  Fort Monroe is a USA supply base,
so has no size limit on attacks based from there.  This can allow the USA to put early pressure on Richmond
(though mind optional rule 3).  The CSA must be careful not to commit all his eastern forces elsewhere
lest a USA raid from Fort Monroe waltz unopposed into Richmond.

Manassas is just a stepping stone on the way to more important places, north and south.  The USA 
breathes a little easier after capturing it, since it prevents direct attacks on Washington.

Because it's a pesthole, Wilderness performs its historical function of preventing bypassing
attacks on Richmond from the north. It also is the gateway to Lynchburg, Greensboro, and points
south hugging the mountains.

Norfolk - captured for free by USA w/Monitor.  Guaranteed not to be a fort, so a good CSA target to break
an Atlantic blockade.

Raleigh is important only if trying to isolate the Richmond and/or the Atlantic ports.  Otherwise you're
wasting supply to attack it.

MAP F

Memphis is the key.  Nice bonus for USA if unfortified.

Corinth helps isolate Vicksburg, is on one path to Atlanta

Grenada is another irritating pesthole.  Needed only as stepping stone to Jackson.

Jackson is needed to isolate Port Hudson and Vicksburg.

Tupelo splits northeast and southeast Mississippi into two fronts.
Not much reason to attack it; driving on Atlanta you stay north, going
for the Gulf ports you stay south.


MAP G

Atlanta is the prize. It's an objective, and being adjacent to six
other cities makes it THE rail hub.  The capture of Atlanta usually doesn't
cut the CSA railnet immediately, but puts it within reach.

Chattanooga is the western gateway to Atlanta.  It's nice for USA if
it's not a fort, but the Blue Mountain Boys will help out even if it
is.

Augusta is the eastern gateway to Atlanta.  [DPT: Check out
theater/supply restrictions -- can either CSA theater defend when
attacked from east]

Decatur is nice to have.  In conjunction with Nashville you have two
jumping off points to hit Chattanooga, making it that much harder for
the CSA to beat you back.

MAP H

The third important map card in determining the game.  USA card gives
USA a free city (New Berne) instead of one more fortified port, making
grabbing Atlantic ports feasible.

...

MAP I
MAP J

The second most important map card. 

The CSA version makes the Union Gulf Ports objective very difficult to
obtain, throwing up three fortresses, plus a pesthole at Selma. This
is usually enough to make the USA look elsewhere for victory.

The USA version gives the north not just a city, but a fortress(!) and removes both
the fort at Mobile and the pesthole at Selma.  This makes tackling the area
much more palatable.

Because it's a pesthole, Meridian complicates a Union drive east from Mississippi.
Rather than smashing through, try driving on the Gulf ports from Atlanta or via naval invasion.

Selma, Montgomery, and Columbus are important mostly for rail net purposes.  Montgomery
has the most connections and hence is the most valuable; Columbus has the fewest connections
and is less important than the other two.

Ft. Morgan is always a CSA fort and prevents invasions against Mobile.  On the USA map,
capture Mobile first and force the Confederates to defend without a retreat route.

Mobile ...





MAP K

Southern Georgia is perhaps the least important card.  An unfortified Savannah is nice
for the USA, but unlikely to be decisive.  Map H is far more influential on whether
the USA can grab the Atlantic ports or not.

Macon is sometimes important as a CSA railnet connection joining the east and west.
Bypass it to capture an unfortified Savannah if you can.

Boston is Savannah's "buddy city".  Its only purpose is to prevent easy isolation 
of Savannah, and to give the port's defenders a retreat path.  It's hard to imagine
wasting a supply to attack it.

*COMBAT*

*VICTORY*

*OPTIONAL RULES*

Variable Soldier's Battle victory: instead of winning a Soldier's
Battle on >= +5 points, roll a third blue die with each combat
resolution roll.  The blue die is ignored unless there is a Soldier's
Battle.  In that case, subtract the weaker side's combat strength from
the stronger side. If the difference is greater than or equal to the
blue dieroll, the stronger side wins the battle; otherwise, the battle
is a stalemate.  Note that forces that are exactly equal will always
stalemate.

Example: the USA with 17 strength attacks a 14-strength CSA force; on
a Soldier's Battle, the USA will win if the blue dieroll is 3 or
greater, since that's the difference between the USA strength and the
CSA strength.

No Kentucky Blitz: Cities in Kentucky may not be used as jumping-off
points for attacks on the player-turn that the USA or CSA Map C cards
are played.  The Neutral Map C card is unaffected by this rule.

I Must Have Kentucky: When either USA or CSA Map C are in play, the
other side gets an extra objective: control all four enemy
cities in Kentucky (Bowling Green, Lexington, Louisville, and
Cumberland Gap).

McClellan: If McClellan begins the USA player turn in command of the
largest USA force, the USA receives a free restore which can be used
in either step 1 or step 5.  The "largest" force is computed strictly
by counting corps and cavalry units, ignoring strengths and steps.  In
case of ties, the bonus does not apply.

McClellan Again: When McClellan commands the USA forces in a battle, Routed
results -- for either side! -- are treated as regular Defeated results.
